Spec: portable AI procedure framework v5 (#133)
Intentional-Society/is-app: docs/spec-portable-ai-procedures.md

7. Stage only explicit paths with `git add -- <paths>`.
8. Run `git diff --cached --name-status`; if nothing is staged, refuse.
9. If schema files changed (`src/server/schema.ts` or `drizzle/**`), identify expand vs contract phase per `docs/strategy-committing.md`. **Refuse combined expand+contract payloads** in a single commit — the two phases must ship as separate commits so the deploy ordering can be preserved. For an expand-phase change, note that `npm run prod:db:expand` dispatches the schema deploy after PR creation and that the post-deploy `e2e.yml` rerun must pass before `/ship` merges.
10. If the parsed argument looks like an issue, `gh issue view <N>` to validate it exists and is open. Fail fast and hard if `gh` is unavailable or unauthenticated (suggest `gh auth login` / `gh auth status`).
11. Run `npm test`. All must pass.

> 12. Draft the commit message in the repo's recent style (use `git log --oneline -20 origin/main` for examples).

Author: Small proposal here: I think the repo may be quietly converging on typed commit/PR headlines, and the skill should probably make that explicit instead of leaving it to whichever recent examples it happens to notice.

Benji has been using this style since April (`chore:` in d151a11, then recent `feat:`, `fix:`, `a11y:`, `test:` examples), and Alexis is now using `feat:` / `fix:` in recent PR titles too. Since recent history now contains both typed and non-typed styles, “use recent git log examples” gives the agent too much room to choose arbitrarily.

I’d propose we adopt Conventional Commit-style headlines as the AI-drafted default, without adding any enforcement machinery in v1: https://www.conventionalcommits.org/en/v1.0.0/

This matters more now because PR #236 makes PR title → merge commit subject, so PR titles are durable `main` history too.

@james-baker @benjifriedman @AlexisChen99 @oolu4236 - opinions? Strong preference either way, or happy to align with Benji's practice?

Suggested replacement for Step 12:

```suggestion
12. Draft the commit message using a Conventional Commit-style subject and the repo's structured body convention. Inspect `git log --oneline -20 origin/main` for recent examples and follow the repo-observed style.
    - Subject format: `<type>[(scope)]: <imperative summary>`, ≤70 chars. Reference: https://www.conventionalcommits.org/en/v1.0.0/
    - Prefer repo-observed types such as `feat`, `fix`, `a11y`, `test`, `docs`, and `chore`; use common Conventional Commit types such as `refactor`, `perf`, `ci`, and `build` when they fit.
    - If several types apply, choose the dominant intent; if unclear, surface the proposed type in the human approval block.
    - For breaking changes, add `!` before the colon and include a `BREAKING CHANGE:` footer explaining the compatibility impact. Surface this explicitly in the human approval block.
 ```

Companion note: I’m adding a matching suggestion on `/pr` Step 9 at R248 so PR titles follow the same headline rule, since PR titles become merge commit subjects in this repo.

Reviewer: The prefixes can be helpful for quick categorization and Claude often adds them automatically when creating PR titles, but I'm not super attached to the standard either way as long as the title is descriptive . I think it doesn't hurt to include this standard if Claude picks it up in its instructions.

@NorsemanSpiff  If we go with these "title types", will that be strictly enforced by the test suite? Or is this more for general code style / readability?

Reviewer 2: I'm fine with it as team style.

Reviewer 2: Although I don't think I understand how we would use the ! for "breaking changes" --- the term seems undefined for us: would we be tracking http-layer api changes (which aren't particularly breaking in our context, we're not versioning our API), or db schema changes (that one could be more useful, except they're by definition not "breaking"), or...

Author: @benjifriedman - Thanks! I figured you'd introduced this naming pattern intentionally since it started with you then saw Alexis' start doing it. Since it matches best-practices I've been reading about I figured we'd codify it. Didn't realize Claude was doing it for you automatically, b/c it wasn't doing that for me. :-P In any case, this would just be general code style / readability. No test enforcement or anything at this time.

@james-baker - Honestly, same. My opinion was that since we're setting some norms now and that the agents do best with guardrails, adopting this from an already published standard/convention seemed reasonable for when we need it. If we don't need it, it won't get used, but it's there when we/agents do. Reasonable?

Reviewer 2: yeah sure

2. Integer resolves via `gh pr view <N>` → existing PR.
3. Integer resolves via `gh issue view <N>` → issue context (treated like `/commit`'s issue-or-context).
4. Anything else → plain-language context.

No `/pr --auto-ship` and no `/pr --auto-merge` — `/ship` is the chained workflow.

**Steps.**

1. Run `gh auth status`; if it fails, refuse and print `gh auth login`.
2. Resolve the argument using the order above.
3. If the resolved PR is on a branch different from the current checkout, refuse — `/pr` does not switch branches. Suggest `/ship <PR#>` for branch-switching.
4. Working-tree pre-flight: if `git status --porcelain` is non-empty OR HEAD is `main`, delegate to `/commit` with the same argument, then continue.
5. `git fetch origin main`.
6. If `git merge-base --is-ancestor origin/main HEAD` fails (main has moved), `git rebase origin/main`. On rebase conflict, abort the rebase, report the conflicted files, and hand control to the human.
7. If the rebase changed anything, re-run `npm test`. Skip the re-run if the rebase was a no-op.
8. `git push -u origin <branch>`. Use `--force-with-lease` only if the rebase rewrote already-pushed commits.

> 9. If no open PR for this branch: draft PR title and body using the repo's `Summary:` / `Why:` / `Behavior:` / `Test Plan:` convention. Title is a concise imperative ≤70 chars (GitHub uses it verbatim as the merge commit subject per `merge_commit_title: PR_TITLE`). Body uses the structured convention (GitHub uses it verbatim as the merge commit message per `merge_commit_message: PR_BODY`). Append the AI co-author trailer to the PR body using the same protocol as `/commit`. `/commit` test-plan provenance and formatting rules apply. Present the draft for human approval, then `gh pr create`.

Author: Suggested update for Step 9--the companion for the update I proposed for `/commit` step 12 at  R167:

```suggestion
9. If no open PR for this branch: draft PR title and body using the same Conventional Commit-style headline rule as `/commit` and the repo's `Summary:` / `Why:` / `Behavior:` / `Test Plan:` body convention. Title is `<type>[(scope)]: <imperative summary>`, ≤70 chars, including `!` for breaking changes (GitHub uses it verbatim as the merge commit subject per `merge_commit_title: PR_TITLE`). Body uses the structured convention (GitHub uses it verbatim as the merge commit message per `merge_commit_message: PR_BODY`). Append the AI co-author trailer to the PR body using the same protocol as `/commit`. `/commit` test-plan provenance and formatting rules apply. Present the draft for human approval, then `gh pr create`.
```

`

James captured the underlying hypothesis in [issue #62](https://github.com/Intentional-Society/is-app/issues/62#issuecomment-4320013457): we should be able to encode reliable process-execution instructions for AIs that transfer across the team. His stated "I'm done" workflow ([issue #62](https://github.com/Intentional-Society/is-app/issues/62#issuecomment-4374728362)) — *test + commit + make PR + watch + merge + tidy* — is the canonical acceptance behavior for `/ship`.

### Goals

- Provide one canonical, repo-resident source of truth for the AI-assisted `/commit`, `/pr`, and `/ship` check-in workflows.
- Make the workflow followable by any supported agent without private per-user prompting, memory, or teammate-specific training.

> - Optimize implementation first for Claude Code, then Codex; provide first-class command/invocation UX where each tool supports it, with GitHub Copilot designed now and implemented after adapter verification.

Reviewer 2: Coming back up here after reading further, I'd prefer to only support one (Claude Code) platform in this entire design - I don't see anything that we have to get right now in order to reduce hypothetical future difficulty if we ever decide to support more platforms later. I'd give Claude that liberating constraint and see how much it can simplify the design.

- No web-side or GUI agent surface.
- No guarantee of identical UX across assistants. The goal is equivalent procedure behavior, not identical trigger mechanics.

### Constraints and trade-offs we accept

These are the real-world constraints the design is shaped against.

- **No uniform slash-command abstraction across assistants.** Claude Code supports both first-class slash commands and Skills; Codex supports user-local prompts plus repo-shared Skills under `.agents/skills/`; Copilot's prompt files work only in VS Code / Visual Studio / JetBrains. The portable artifact has to be the procedure doc; per-tool slash UX is surfacing.
- **GitHub access is uneven across agents.** Some agents have `gh` CLI, some have GitHub MCP, some have neither. Procedures must be written to work with whatever GitHub access the agent has, and to stop-and-ask cleanly when none is available.
- **Hooks tempt us but aren't portable.** A Claude Code `PreToolUse` hook on `Bash(git commit*)` would enforce gates cleanly, but it's Claude-only and CLI-only. Hooks may be added later as belt-and-suspenders enforcement; the procedure must stand on its own.

> - **Aider has its own `/commit` that auto-commits by default.** First-class shim deferred; Aider users can read the procedure docs by hand.

Reviewer 2: I'd be happy to simplify by ignoring that Aider exists.

- **GitHub Copilot's coding agent runs server-side on PRs**, not on a developer's checkout. Different mental model from CLI assistants. v1 design supports it via AGENTS.md (no slash UX needed).

> - **`npm test` includes Playwright e2e** (slow, can flake on cold start). The default pre-commit gate must not run the full suite — `lint + typecheck + test:functional` is the right local gate, matching what CI's required check covers anyway. The procedure escalates to full `npm test` only on user request or for high-risk/e2e-sensitive changes (see `/commit` step 5). **This contradicts current `CLAUDE.md`** ("Run `npm test` before committing"); resolved by editing CLAUDE.md in Phase 1a.

Reviewer 2: If a human wants to debate this, let's talk, but otherwise this is just wrong. I put e2e inside npm test intentionally.

Author: Ack. Refactoring; keeping npm test the authority.

- **Existing `/review` and `/security-review` skills already work as Claude Code commands.** The procedure should *compose* with them ("for security-touching changes, run `/security-review` before `/ship`"), not absorb them.

> - **Claude Code does not yet read AGENTS.md natively** as of May 2026. We accept dual-maintenance of `CLAUDE.md` and `AGENTS.md` for now; collapse to a single index when Anthropic ships AGENTS.md support.

Reviewer 2: I'm not sure I accept this. Do we have any need for dual maintenance right now? We could switch gladly when Anthropic adopts the standard, but for now I'd welcome the complexity reduction.

- `npm test` runs lint + typecheck + local DB setup + Vitest + Playwright e2e (the slow flaky full suite). Repo `CLAUDE.md` currently says "Run `npm test` before committing" — must be reconciled with the procedure-doc guidance in Phase 1a.
- Schema is defined in `src/server/schema.ts`; Drizzle migrations live under `drizzle/`.
- Project-board automation: `PR Linked → In progress`, `PR Merged → Done` (per `docs/doc-strategy-project-management.md`). Closing keywords (`Closes #N`/`Fixes #N`/`Resolves #N`) create the GitHub-linked-PR relationship the automation depends on; plain `(#N)` references are visible context but do not create that link.
- `vercel.json` `ignoreCommand` already skips preview builds for docs-only branch diffs.

## 3. Proposed Design

### Proposed architecture

#### Files: new vs existing

The v1 work splits cleanly into new files, edits to existing files, and existing files that stay as-is. Crucial principle: **strategy docs are policy/rationale for humans; procedure docs are imperative step-by-step for agents.** Procedure docs *reference* strategy docs; they never duplicate them.

| File / folder | Status | Role |
|---|---|---|

> | `docs/ai-procedures/index.md` | **NEW** | Discoverable map: canonical files, adapter locations, extension recipe, maintenance triggers, and policy/reference docs. See Appendix E for the creation and maintenance workflow. |

Reviewer 2: is "procedures" the generic/standardized way to say "skills", or/and are there things other than skills that will land here?

(I understand "skills" to be a word that's broader than "slash commands" but does not include e.g. "hooks")

.claude/skills/
  commit/SKILL.md        # Claude Code adapter (Skill format)
  pr/SKILL.md
  ship/SKILL.md

.agents/skills/
  commit/SKILL.md        # Codex adapter; likely also picked up by Copilot Chat
  pr/SKILL.md
  ship/SKILL.md

.github/                                       # Phase 3, conditional on OQ-1 verification
  copilot-instructions.md                      # only if needed
  skills/{commit,pr,ship}/SKILL.md             # only if .agents/skills/ isn't picked up
```

#### Why this layout

The Files table above lists every artifact and its status. The non-obvious choices in this layout are:

- **`ai-` prefix on `docs/ai-procedures/`** disambiguates from any other "procedures" the team might add later (deployment, security, onboarding) and matches the repo's existing purpose-prefixed `docs/` convention.
- **AGENTS.md and CLAUDE.md stay tiny** by pointing at `docs/ai-procedures/index.md` rather than carrying the extension recipe themselves. CLAUDE.md exists only because Claude Code does not yet read AGENTS.md natively; it collapses to a one-line pointer when Anthropic ships AGENTS.md support.

> - **Skills format over slash commands for Claude.** The same folder shape works on Codex (`.agents/skills/`) and likely on Copilot Chat — one mental model across all three tools, with implicit-invocation parity as a bonus. Cost: using Claude's slightly newer/less-documented Skills feature instead of the more-mature `.claude/commands/<name>.md`.

Reviewer 2: ignoring codex support, I'm still in favor of using the newer Skills feature - the older way is more likely to get deprecated, is my general thought

- **`.agents/skills/` is the cross-tool location**, not Codex-specific. VS Code Agent Skills also discover this path, so it likely covers Copilot Chat without a Copilot-specific shim.
- **`.github/skills/` and `.github/copilot-instructions.md` are conditional Phase 3 deliverables** — added only if OQ-1 verification shows that `.agents/skills/` discovery in the team's Copilot environment isn't sufficient.

#### Trade-offs explicitly chosen

- **Claude Code does not yet read AGENTS.md** → maintain `CLAUDE.md` and `AGENTS.md` in parallel. Forward-compat: collapse when Anthropic ships support.
- **Skills format over slash commands for Claude** → consistency across tools beats Claude-native frontmatter affordances; we don't currently need `argument-hint`.
- **Copilot's multiple surfaces** → coding agent + Chat IDE are covered in v1 via AGENTS.md and `.agents/skills/`; Copilot CLI is an explicit non-goal.

> - **One folder per skill (Skills format) vs one file per command** → marginally heavier file structure, paid for by single-mental-model maintenance.

Reviewer 2: this has me asking, "wait, is an extra layer of folders really helpful?"

- **Adapter-shim folders proliferate slightly** → each adapter is 3-10 lines pointing at the canonical procedure; no procedure logic in shims.

### Documentation and source-of-truth model

- **`docs/ai-procedures/<name>.md`** = single source of truth for procedure logic.

> - **`docs/ai-procedures/index.md`** = discoverable map of canonical files, adapters, extension recipe, policy-doc references.

Reviewer 2: does this actually help?

For agents: AGENTS.md and CLAUDE.md both point at the index, which lists every procedure doc with a one-sentence "use when" pointer. Procedure doc filenames are predictable (`commit.md`, `pr.md`, `ship.md`).

#### Drift detection

The procedure docs maintain cross-reference footers to the policy docs and config they depend on; high-impact policy docs (`doc-strategy-committing.md`, `doc-strategy-branching.md`, `doc-github.md`, `doc-strategy-project-management.md`) include "Related AI procedures" back-links; the PR template flags both procedure-doc edits (with a smoke-test prompt) and high-impact policy-doc edits (with an anchor/rule check) so neither side of the dependency drifts unnoticed. A policy-doc change requires a procedure-doc update only when it changes agent behavior: what an agent should do, ask, run, stop on, or report. Heavier mechanisms (analysis scripts, scheduled monitors, CI lint of the procedure docs themselves) are deferred to v1.1+.

## 4. Procedure Behavior

### Command/procedure scope

#### Three commands

| Command | Intent | Internal behavior |
|---|---|---|

> | `/commit` | Make a single, well-formed local commit | Walk gates → propose message → human review → commit; stops at local commit. |

Reviewer 2: I would assume this wants to push the commit to the remote.
And take care of branch creation if we're starting on main.

> | `/pr` | Push current branch and ensure a PR exists in the right state | State-dispatcher; opens new PR or updates existing; reports CI status; **does not enable auto-merge**. Stops after PR is open and CI is reported. |

Reviewer 2: I think this includes "run commit if we have uncommitted changes".

Stops after PR is open - I'm not sure we want babysitting the CI checks on this skill. (maybe as an option)

> | `/ship` | The full "I'm done" workflow | State-aware: from a clean branch, runs commit → push → PR → wait for required + advisory CI → confirm with human → merge → tidy. Performs the merge directly. |

Reviewer 2: the state-aware bit should just delegate to /commit and /pr as necessary, and then the only thing this needs to add is "ensure all checks are green (watching until they're done if needed)", merge (merge commit preferred), tidy (remote branch deletes with the merge command, one extra command to delete local branch).

For end-to-end developer dialogues showing what each command looks like in practice (happy path, dirty-tree handling, schema-touch, bugfix-without-regression-test, advisory-pending-on-`/ship`, refusal cases), see **Appendix D**.

#### Naming decision: `/ship`, not `/merge`, no aliases in v1

`/ship` wins over `/merge` because it captures James's stated workflow (test + commit + make PR + watch + merge + tidy), is intent-based rather than primitive-based, and composes naturally with the primitives: `/commit` → `/pr` → `/ship` walks low-to-high abstraction.

We do not ship a `/merge` alias in v1 (synonym proliferation is overhead in a small team; "merge this" is accepted as a plain-language alias, but `/merge` is not a separate v1 command).

We do not ship a `/pr --ship` flag (the state-aware `/ship` command makes the chained-flag glue redundant; revisit in v1.1+ once both procedures are stable).

> We do not enable `gh pr merge --auto` from `/pr` in v1. `/pr` prepares; `/ship` finishes. No GitHub-side auto-merge in v1. Auto-merge from `/pr` may return as an opt-in flag (e.g., `/pr --auto-merge`) once both procedures have proven stable in dogfooding.

Reviewer 2: "pr --auto-merge" would just be "/ship", right? The rest of this section looks correct.

#### State dispatch — plain English

All three commands inspect repo state and pick the right next action.

For **`/commit`**: branch != main, diff non-empty, gates pass → commit. Otherwise refuse with a clear reason.

For **`/pr`**:
- HEAD is `main` → refuse.
- Working tree dirty + commits exist → ask: include uncommitted in this PR (run `/commit`), stash, or proceed with existing commits.
- Working tree dirty + no commits → narrate "no commits yet — running `/commit` first" and continue.
- Clean tree + commits exist + no open PR → run **Open procedure**.
- Clean tree + open PR exists → push new commits to existing PR (state report).
- Open PR → report CI state. Stop. (Merging is `/ship`'s job.)
- PR merged → "already merged; want me to tidy the local branch?".

> For **`/ship`**: same dispatch as `/pr`, but on "PR is green" the agent confirms with the human and then merges directly (no auto-merge); after merge it tidies the local branch (`git branch -d <branch>` after confirming remote was deleted). On advisory failure or pending state, runs the **Supervised-auto handoff** with a 5-minute bounded wait + extension option.

Reviewer 2: Why does this exist, seems redundant to the step by step below

#### `/commit` — required step-by-step

> 1. **Branch check.** Refuse if HEAD is `main`.

Reviewer 2: if branch = main, it should create a branch (auto-name based on existing context) and move the changes there.

2. **Diff scan.** `git diff` and `git diff --staged`. Abort if both empty (no-op commit).
3. **Doc-sync gate.** If touched files include schema, API shapes, or behavior covered in `CLAUDE.md` / `docs/`, prompt to update those before committing.

> 4. **Devjournal prompt.** If the change is teammate-relevant (heuristic: non-trivial code change, new dependency, behavior change, security-relevant), draft a `docs/devjournal.md` entry and ask the human to accept/edit/skip.

Reviewer 2: I've found, gotta tell the AI to be brief, and don't use more than a sentence unless teammates MUST know more detail

Reviewer 2: Heuristic: something that needs to change teammates' actions/behavior (not just "any non-trivial code change")

> 5. **Pre-commit gate.** Run `npm run lint`, `npm run typecheck`, `npm run test:functional`. All must pass. Do **not** run `npm test` (full suite includes flaky e2e) by default. **Escalate to full `npm test`** when:

Reviewer 2: Nope, just run npm test. If that's not good enough, we'll fix it inside there.

   - the human explicitly requests it, OR
   - the change touches auth, schema/contract, routing, security, cross-browser/UI behavior, production config, OR
   - the change is a pre-`/ship` change without meaningful human smoke testing.
6. **Coverage heuristic.** For each `src/**` file in the diff, look for matching changes under `tests/` or a sibling `*.test.*` file. Surface gaps as questions, not refusals. **Bugfix exception**: a bugfix (commit subject starts with `Fix:` or PR closes a bug-tagged issue) without a regression test is a near-blocker — require explicit human acknowledgement before continuing.

> 7. **Schema-touch detection.** If `src/server/schema.ts` or anything under `drizzle/` is in the diff, surface what the generated migration SQL touches and confirm the expand-contract phase per `doc-strategy-committing.md`. Refuse to bundle expand and contract phases in the same PR (existing rule: *"Each phase is its own PR and deploy. Never combine expand and contract in a single deploy."*).

Reviewer 2: If we're doing expand, there's an npm script for requesting the forward-deployment of the schema, and that should happen .... it's questionable, but I'm gonna say "after PR" (and the PR e2e will fail, but everything else should pass) but then an e2e rerun must pass after the schema is deployed before merging.

> 8. **Issue lookup.** If the human named an issue, `gh issue view <N>` to confirm it exists and is open. If `gh` is unavailable, skip with a clear note rather than guessing.

Reviewer 2: if "gh" is unavailable, fail fast and hard in any of these.

9. **Secret scan.** Stop and ask on `.env*` files, common secret-pattern matches, or unexpectedly large files; do not commit unless the human explicitly confirms it is safe.

> 10. **Commit message draft.** Use the repo's recent style (`git log --oneline -20 origin/main`). Structure: subject under 70 chars, then `Why:` / `Behavior:` / `Test Plan:` body, then `Closes #N` if the commit resolves an issue, or `(#N)` for a non-resolving reference. **Test-plan provenance rule**: every line is either (a) a command the agent ran with captured output, (b) a verbatim human attestation, or (c) a single collapsed line for "ran lint + typecheck + functional locally". Never invented.

Reviewer 2: the human should get an approval check here? (then run to completion)

> 11. **Co-author trailer.** Default-include `Co-Authored-By:` with model specificity when the agent ran `/commit` AND can read its own model identity. If model identity is not visible, stop and ask the human rather than inventing one. Cache the human's answer for the session. For genuinely shared authorship (e.g., the human did most of the typing and the agent advised), attach the trailer only on explicit human confirmation.

Reviewer 2: I think we might not need to do anything here? AIs do this automatically?

> 12. **Stage explicitly.** `git add <files>` — never `git add -A` or `git add .`.

Reviewer 2: this should happen before the commit message, maybe even earlier? then at this point a "git status" must be empty

13. **Commit.** Pass message via heredoc. If a commit hook or local gate fails, fix the issue and retry safely. Do **not** use `git commit --amend` or otherwise rewrite existing commits unless the human explicitly approves.

> 14. **Stop.** Don't push. Output: commit SHA + suggestion to run `/pr` or `/ship` when ready.

Reviewer 2: I'm not sure why we would not push?

#### `/pr` — required structure

`/pr` prepares or updates a PR and reports CI. It does **not** merge and does **not** enable auto-merge. When the working tree isn't in the happy state, the agent evaluates with a "do no harm" lens and continues the natural next step rather than forcing the human to retype.

**Working-tree gate** (runs first, regardless of which sub-procedure follows). Inspect `W = git status --porcelain` (uncommitted changes) and `C = git log origin/main..HEAD` (commits ahead of `main`). Dispatch on the four-quadrant outcome:
- **W empty, C empty** — branch is identical to `main`. Refuse; nothing to PR.
- **W non-empty, C empty** — no commits yet. Announce ("no commits on this branch — running `/commit` first, then opening the PR") and flow into it. Human still reviews the commit message before it is written.

> - **W non-empty, C non-empty** — ambiguous. Stop and ask: "you have `<N>` existing commits plus uncommitted work in `<files>`. Should the new work be part of this PR (commit it first), set aside (stash it), or shipped later (proceed with just existing commits)?" Don't pick silently.

Reviewer 2: in all "W non-empty" cases, just run /commit first. (I'm good with assuming people want to PR the current state of the work they've done. If not, they should stash before PR)

- **W empty, C non-empty** — happy path. Continue to the sub-procedure the dispatcher selected.

> - **HEAD is `main`** — refuse regardless of W/C; no safe auto-fix.

Reviewer 2: nope, also just dispatch to /commit

**Open procedure** (state: clean tree, commits exist, no open PR).

> 1. Re-run the default local gate (`npm run lint`, `npm run typecheck`, `npm run test:functional`) unless it was just run successfully for the same diff.

Reviewer 2: this should go after 2, as 2 is the most common reason to re-run tests.

> 2. **Branch-freshness check.** `git fetch origin main && git log origin/main..HEAD`. If branch is behind `main`, ask whether to rebase before pushing.

Reviewer 2: hmm, why wouldn't we always rebase? (I'm not actually sure)

Author: So, here's the context. As I was talking with Claude about this, it kept talking about how rebasing isn't free, since it rewrites commits, restarts CI, sometimes surfaces conflicts the human is better placed to handle. Kept suggesting asking is the safer default. That said, I thought there should be a middle-ground--and Codex suggested something like 'git fetch origin main' always, then examining any overlapping file changes before recommending to rebase or not. Thoughts? That's what I'm going to put in the revised and simplified spec.

Reviewer 2: "git fetch origin main" always good to see what's current. (even *before* the "re-run local gate")

TIL there's two different rebase usage scenarios! There's "if main has moved under your branch, rebase" which we do want, and there's "rebase-merge" which we don't want. I've done some doc and settings updates on the *merge*-types, which I think doesn't affect this question here. (I think "restarts CI" is a red-herring as that's not specific to rebase at all AFAIK)

After yet more research, I decided to bite the bullet on "Require branches to be up to date before merging."

So then after the "git fetch origin main", if main has moved we need to update the branch. Very precise guidance is "Rebase by default. Use merge-to-update when active review is happening, when the same conflict keeps recurring, or when you'd be misrepresenting what a commit did. Then rebase once before final merge." but I think that would translate into "just use rebase" 95% of the time.

3. **Push.** `git push -u origin <branch>`.
4. **PR title + body draft.** Title under 70 chars. Body: Context / What changed / Why / Test Plan / `Closes #N` (only when the PR resolves the issue) or `(#N)` (for non-resolving references). Test-plan provenance rule applies. Co-Authored-By trailer appended to PR body when the agent opens it (same model-specificity and ambiguity rules as the commit trailer). Draft to chat for human review before posting.
5. **Open PR.** `gh pr create` with the approved body. If `gh` is unavailable, stop and report the manual alternative.

> 6. **Report CI state.** Run `gh pr checks <N>` (or `--watch` briefly) to observe required + advisory state. Print PR URL + check summary.

Reviewer 2: print link to the url yes, but I see no point in checking the checks immediately.

7. Stop. Stay available — the human can run `/ship` when ready.

**Update-existing-PR path** (state: clean tree, commits exist, open PR exists).

> - Skip the title/body draft.

Reviewer 2: potentially the PR body should be updated based on the new commits?

Either that or a comment should be added to the PR conversation.

- Push the new commits to the existing branch (`git push`).
- Note in chat: "Pushed `<SHA>` to existing PR #<N>." Report current CI status.

**Docs-only awareness.** Recognize that for branches whose entire diff is docs-only, the no-op `Lint & Functional Tests` status posts in seconds via `ci-docs-skip.yml`. No special-casing needed; the agent just polls and gets green fast.

#### `/ship` — required structure

`/ship` finishes a PR. It performs the merge directly — no `gh pr merge --auto`, no GitHub-side auto-merge in v1.

> 1. Run the same Working-tree gate and state dispatcher as `/pr`. From clean + commits + no PR: invoke `/pr`'s **Open procedure** first, then continue here.

Reviewer 2: "From no PR" (/pr can handle uncommited status by delegating to /commit)

> 2. **Resolve the target PR** from the current branch, an explicit PR number, or a user-provided URL.

Reviewer 2: Ah, right, maybe /ship should take an optional PR# argument? (which wouldn't necessitate that we're already on that branch, there might need to be some switch-branch logic in there).
Optional feature.

> 3. **Confirm required check is green.** `gh pr checks <N>`. If `Lint & Functional Tests` is not green, refuse and surface the failure.

Reviewer 2: if **anything** is not green

4. **Inspect advisory check state** (E2E + CodeQL):
   - Both already green → proceed.
   - Either red → run **Supervised-auto handoff** (proceed / abort / troubleshoot).
   - Either pending or unavailable → wait up to **5 minutes**, polling at ~30-second intervals.
5. After the 5-minute window, if any advisory is still pending or unavailable → run **Supervised-auto handoff** with an additional **"wait another 5 minutes"** option for the case where the human can see e2e is genuinely still running and wants to extend.

   *Rationale for the 5-minute default*: empirically grounded in repo history. Of recent paired CI/E2E runs where E2E completed after CI, ~94% finished within 5 minutes of CI green. The remaining ~6% are cold-start or network-tail cases where human judgment is the right next step.

> 6. **Branch-freshness check.** If the PR is behind `main`, ask whether to rebase + re-push (which restarts CI) or hand off.

Reviewer 2: If the AI can look at what has landed on main and make a judgement call about whether this is worth asking, that'd be cool.

> 7. **Confirm with human before merge.** Show the PR URL and a short summary (commit count, files changed, +/- line counts) and ask: *"Ready to merge PR #<N>? [Y/n]"*. **Always confirm** — even when `/ship` opened the PR earlier in the same run. This preserves the "no replacement for human PR review" non-goal.

Reviewer 2: Hmm, I'm gonna disagree - I don't think we need a double-confirmation of "ship it" if the PR already existed when they typed /ship. We need the confirmation ONLY when the PR was just created as a part of this /ship invocation.

> 8. **Merge.** `gh pr merge <N> --merge --delete-branch`. Use merge commit by default; squash only on explicit human request. Never bypass branch protection, force merge, or use admin bypass.

Reviewer 2: when/how would a human request that. maybe a --squash option on /ship?

9. **Tidy local branch.** After confirming remote branch deletion, run `git branch -d <branch>` locally. Switch back to `main` and `git pull` so the human's working state is clean for the next change.

> 10. **Post-merge confirmation.** Report the merge SHA and link to Vercel's deploy status.

Reviewer 2: Ooh, feature request: watch/babysit the checks that run **on main** after the merge commit lands there. If anything goes red, alert the human immediately.
(I'm open to that babysitting happening in a background process, since we expect this to be green 95%+ of the time)

**Supervised-auto handoff** (runs when an advisory check fails, is unavailable, or is still pending after the bounded wait). The agent does not silently merge through it and does not silently abort. It surfaces the failure with options and stays in the conversation:

> 1. **Proceed.** Merge despite the advisory state (human takes responsibility). Still subject to step 7's merge confirmation.

Reviewer 2: Nope - never ignore a red or unfinished check, all checks MUST be green

2. **Abort.** Don't merge; treat the advisory as a real signal.
3. **Troubleshoot together.** Walk the failure with the agent — read the CodeQL alert / inspect the failing E2E test / draft a fix.
4. **Wait another 5 minutes.** Available when state is pending/unavailable; extends the bounded wait window without re-invoking `/ship`.

This keeps the agent in the loop where it adds value (helping resolve), not just at the bookend.

> ### Guardrails and edge cases

Reviewer 2: I'm tired, and much of the below will be affected by simplifying the design down to one AI platform, so I'm gonna stop here for this review.
